gpicker version 1.0

Copying and distribution of this file, with or without modification,
are permitted in any medium without royalty provided the copyright
notice and this notice are preserved.


What is gpicker?
----------------

gpicker is a program that allows you to quickly and conveniently pick
file in a (possibly very large) project. You type significant letters
of file name (typically from the start of words) and gpicker provides
you with a list of files you most likely mean to pick. The program
filters and orders project's list of files in real-time as you type.

It was inspired by class finding facility of IntelliJ IDEA and
'Command-T' feature of TextMate, but it's in many ways much better.
It is language-agnostic and supports matching directory names too.
Read on for details.

It is usable as a standalone program, but it was created to be used by
editors/IDEs. Currently only Emacs intergration is provided. See
comments on top of gpicker.el for installation notes. This README
describes general usage concepts.

To place 'correct' matches on top gpicker uses sophisticated scoring
heuristics. Scoring is implemented by efficient dynamic programming
algorithm which makes filtration and ordering very fast. The scoring
details are described below.


Performance notes
-----------------

Don't judge gpicker's performance by first run. gpicker scans project
for list of files on every start. This can take a while on first run. But
subsequent runs will hit OS's directory entries cache and will
start almost instantly.

Real-time filtration should be snappy on most, but largest
projects. At least if your CPU is not very old.


Usage in examples
-----------------

When I want to pick 'vendor/rails/activerecord/lib/active_record/base.rb'
inside rails project I can type 'ba' or 'bas'. But it won't be
displayed on top, because rails has several files named base.rb in
different directories. I can type 'ar/ba' (or even 'ar/b'). This will
match 'ar' against directory name and 'ba' against basename and will
place 'correct' file on top.

To pick source of java.lang.ClassLoader class inside openjdk I can try
'cload'. There a many matches and correct file is not in top 5 (but
it's in top 10). I can try placing emphasis on start of words by
capitalizing them - 'cLoa' or 'CLoa'. But that removes only one extra
match. I can add directory name pattern to better convey my
intention. 'lan/cLo' is sufficient to find correct file on second
place. It can be selected via arrow keys now. And 'cl/la/cLo' (added
another part of directory - 'classes') or 'lan/cLo.j' (added
extension) is enough to place it first. 'clloderj' works too. Notice
skipped 'a' from 'loader'.

There are two ways to emphasize start of words. One is capitalizing
first letters. 'aRe' or 'AR' will give large score to 'active_record',
'active-record', 'active.record' and 'ActiveRecord'.

Second way is placing matching delimiters before first letter.
'b.r' will give large score for 'base.rb', because match of 'r' after
delimiter is considered start of the word. Delimiters '_' and '-' are
interchangeable. So association_proxy.rb can be matched with 'a-pro'
and with 'a_pro' (and with 'aPro' of course). That was done because
'-' is easier to type.

Empty basename patterns can be used to browse list of files in some
directory. For example 'are/con-ad/' can be used to see contents of
vendor/rails/activerecord/lib/active_record/connection_adapters/.


Filtering & scoring details
---------------------------

Only matching entries pass through filter. In simple words, there is
a match between given pattern and name if and only if it is possible
to transform name to pattern by removing characters from it without
changing order of remaining characters.

Matching is case insensitive, though capital letters both in pattern
and in name are additionally treated as word starts. Letters after
delimiters also count as word starts.

Smart ordering of matches is based on matches' scores. Scoring rules
are quite simple. Each character match is given some score and those
are summed for total match score. Match on word start is given
0x100000 points if matching pattern character is on word start too,
and 0x201 points otherwise. Match is given 0x400 points if it's
adjacent to previous match. And all other matches are given 0 points.

The idea is that 'proper' word start matches are most precious. All
other matches score significantly less. Among those substring matches
score about twice as much as non-proper word start matches. And
completely wild matches do not score at all.

If there are several matches for given name then the scoring algorithm
picks leftmost (or rightmost, for directory name matches) with maximal
score.

Directory names and basenames are scored separately and directory name
score is considered only when basename scores are equal.

For typically short patterns it's not unlikely to have a group of
names with maximal score. So great attention is given to ordering
names with equal scores. Current ordering heuristic takes
compactness of match into account (minimization of last matching
character index) and length of names. See code in filtration.c for
exact details.
